# Introduction and Contextual Background of Cybercrime as an Emerging Phenomenon in Africa  

Stanley Osezua Ehiane and Mosud Y. Olumoye  

# Introduction  

In many ways, information, and communication technologies (ICTs) have shrunk the world, but they have also exposed the world to influences that have never been as diverse and difficult (Seemma et al., 2018). Modern communication equipment, internet access, and robust computer systems for data processing were all made possible by the development of digital technology (Hunda et al., 2014). The vulnerability of these systems and the potential for abuse or criminal activities have increased due to the rapid proliferation of large-scale computer networks with the ability to access multiple systems over conventional telecommunication lines (Oghenevwogaga, 2017). Information technology, according to Dalal (2006), is a double-edged sword with both destructive and beneficial uses. Governments, organisations, and individuals now all rely heavily on the Internet. ICT and computer networks are used by many people, businesses, and governmental organisations to carry out simple and sophisticated tasks, such as social networking, research, and business and trade. But as more businesses, organisations, and people are duped by cybercriminals both domestically and abroad, cyberspace is growing more and more susceptible (Onuora et al., 2017). According to McCusker (2006), cybercrime has evolved into a significant component of the global danger to the environment and evokes urgent imagery of sinister and intricate online behaviour. Borders are irrelevant to cybercrime. Cybercrime concerns are getting worse as broadband internet access and mobile-related services become more widely available in African nations. Cybercrime is becoming a bigger issue as a result of the increased use of contemporary ICTs (Bande, 2018). According to a Norton (2012) analysis, the annual cost of cybercrime around the world is $\$110$ billion.  

According to Chinweze et al. (2019), the rate at which the African continent is embracing digital technology is encouraging the introduction of new attack methods and opportunities for cybercriminals. National, regional, and worldwide peace and security are already threatened by growing global cyber threats and cyberattacks (Chiluwa et al., 2022). Cyber dangers are global issues, necessitating the use of global frameworks as tools to advance stability and security in cyberspace. Few cybersecurity measures have been adopted at the continental level, although cybersecurity issues go beyond just national security (Al-Shalam, 2022). The use of computers for criminal purposes began at the end of the twentieth century and is continuing to grow in the twenty-first (Akuta et al., 2011). Without question, emerging economies are becoming the focus of cybercrime. Unsurprisingly, several African economies have developed into significant providers of cyber threats as well as their victims (Kshetri, 2019a). Even in technologically advanced nations like the United States, cybercrimes have advanced beyond traditional crimes and now pose a threat to all nations’ national security (Laura, 2005). When it comes to cybercrime activity growth, Africa has been one of the fastest-growing continents. Significant cyberattacks on the rest of the world originate from the continent as well (Kshetri, 2019a). Analysts have proposed a threshold level of $10\mathrm{-}15\%$ internet penetration as the source of substantial hacking operations when examining the trend of cybercrimes across nations (Kshetri, 2013). One of the areas with the greatest incidence of cybercrime and considerable monetary losses is Africa. Africa is a continent where cybercrime is thriving.  

According to Maitanmi et al. (2013), cybercrime is an international epidemic that is spreading rapidly throughout Africa. Cybercriminals have long viewed Africa as an ideal location for their illegal activities. As a result, Africa has developed into a “safe haven” for online scammers. Despite several efforts by the international community to combat cybercrime worldwide, these factors—technology, globalisation, and digital capitalism—seem to have a positive influence on the crime rate. Cybercrime keeps growing as technology and digital capitalism do (Green et al., 2020; Norris et al.,  2019). For instance, to combat cybercrime, the United Nations (UN) Commission on Crime Prevention and Justice (CCPJ) has been strengthened with cyber professionals to support cyberrelated crimes in the global economy (Aribake & Aji, 2022; Jerome, 2019).  

Due to the large number of domains and poor network and information security, statistics from a variety of sources suggest that Africa is particularly vulnerable to cyber-related dangers (Symantec Corporation, 2014). According to Physorg (2022), cybercrime cost the continent of Africa’s GDP more than $10\%$ of its total GDP in 2021, or $\$4.12$ billion. Online scams are the most pervasive and urgent cyber threat, according to Institute for Security Studies (2022). In particular, credit card and banking fraud are seen as severe threats throughout Africa. It entails the theft of private information, including banking information, which is then utilised by a threat actor to make purchases, steal money, or resell items (Danquah & Longe, 2021). The sophistication of cyberattacks and the financial harm they cause have been growing at exponential rates for several years, and cybersecurity has now become a serious worry for everyone around the globe. Cybercrime has a significant impact that transcends national boundaries (Olalekan & Kamarudeen, 2021). A strong cybersecurity culture, effective response capabilities, and the adoption of appropriate and effective national policies are the only ways to fully address the threats that Africa is currently facing regarding Internet security measures to prevent and control technological and informational risks (Das & Nayak, 2013).  

In Africa, a new type of criminal behaviour has emerged as a result of the growth of the Internet and the development of new accessible technologies (Goodman & Brenner, 2022). It is alarming to see how quickly cybercrime is spreading throughout Africa. An upsurge in the fight against cybercrime in Africa has been brought on by the prevalence of this crime (Akuta et al., 2011). Cybercrime is steadily increasing in frequency in emerging nations. It’s crucial to keep in mind that what makes cybercrime intriguing is that it affects both Africa and other continents equally (Adewole et al., 2021). Without a doubt, every nation and region deals with cybercriminals and endures losses at the hands of their citizen cybercriminals. However, compared to any Western or Asian nation, Africa is more commonly referred to as a “continent of cybercriminals” in the public sphere (Das & Nayak, 2013). The various difficulties that the continent faces and the emotive nature of the kind of crimes committed there, however, have helped to give Africa the distinctive reputation of being a continent rife with corruption and criminals. This study divided cybercrimes into two categories: those that target networks or devices and those that include the use of gadgets as a tool for criminal activity. The latter, however, is the subject of this essay.  

# The Meaning and Nature of Cybercrime  

Cybercrime is still a highly undefined idea. There are numerous contradictory “facts” about the breadth of cybercrime as a result of the various “lenses” employed to observe it. The definition of cybercrime must be understood to recognise it as a developing global problem (Chiluwa et al., 2022). The word “cyber” comes from the word “cybernetic,” which is derived from the Greek word “cybernetics” (Ogunleye et al., 2022). A wide variety of online crimes, including fraud , blackmail, child pornography, digital forgery, cyber espionage, and cyber terrorism have all been referred to as cybercrime (Green et al., 2020). There are numerous attempts in the literature to categorise and define cybercrime. The term “cybercrime” is widely used by people in our modern world. With the development of information and communication technologies came the idea of cybercrime. People from all walks of life have benefited greatly from the Internet’s massive digitisation and unprecedented interconnection (Onuora et al., 2017). Cybercrime refers to any type of crime committed using a computer or the Internet (Ibikunle, 2022). According to Abdul-Rasheed Ishowo, Muhammed, and Abdullateef (2016), cybercrime is a relatively new phenomenon; crime itself is not. Numerous people have explored the subject of cybercrime from a variety of angles, the majority approaching it from a different angle than others. Cybercrimes have developed beyond traditional crimes and now pose a threat to the national security of all countries, even technologically developed countries (Makeri, 2017).  

In 2021, Manish Cybercrimes are thought of as any unethical, illegal, or unauthorised action of humans involving the usage of Computer Systems and Networks, as well as the automatic processing and transmission of data. According to the United Nations (2018), cybercrime is any illicit activity directed through electronic means that compromises the security of computer systems and the data they process. Cybercrime is characterised as crimes performed online using a computer as a tool or a specific target. A crime connected to computers, computer networks, and the internet is referred to as cybercrime. Although the term “cybercrime” is now widely used, scholars have long faced the severe issue that there is no one, accepted definition of this term (Williams & Levi, 2015). It is a word frequently used to refer to a variety of illegal acts that make use of ICTs (information and communication technologies). Other phrases that might be used interchangeably include “virtual crime,” “net crime,” “hi-tech crime,” and “computer crime” (Wall, 2004). Cybercrime is any criminal offence that includes the use of the Internet or another computer network. They are crimes committed against a person or group of people with the intent to harm the victim’s reputation abroad or to harm the victim’s physical or mental health using contemporary telecommunication networks directly or indirectly like the Internet and mobile phones (Akogwu, 2012). Similar to this, Quarshie and Martin-Odoom (2012) define cybercrimes as crimes carried out online that use a computer as a tool or a specific target. Depending on which of the two is the primary goal, cybercrimes can affect both the computer and the person operating it as victims. Consequently, the computer could be examined as either a target or a tool. Any illegal, unethical, or unauthorised behaviour in a system that transports data or processes information automatically is considered a cybercrime (Solak & Topaloglu, 2015: 591). When a digital tool or information system is used as a target or simply a mix of both, this is known as cybercrime. According to Sabilloni et al. (2016), the terms “cybercrime” and “e-crime,” as well as “high-technology crime,” “information age crime,” “cybernetic crime,” and “computer-related crime” can all be used interchangeably to refer to the same thing. The European Commission on Cyber Security Strategy (2013) refers to cybercrime as:  

a broad range of different criminal activities where computers and information systems are involved either as a primary tool or as a primary target. Cybercrime comprises traditional offences (such as fraud, forgery, and identity theft), content-related offences (such as online distribution of child pornography or incitement to racial hatred) and offences unique to computers and information systems (such as attacks against information systems, denial of service and malware).  

Criminal activities carried out online and through computers are referred to as cybercrime. According to Ibikunle and Eweniyi (2013), this might range from downloading illicit music files to stealing millions of dollars from online bank accounts. Cybercrime also encompasses non-financial offences like developing and disseminating viruses on other computers or publishing private company data online.  

According to Shinder (2002), cybercrime is any criminal act that includes the use of the Internet or another computer network. Cybercrimes are crimes committed against a person or a group of people with the intent to harm the victim’s reputation abroad or to directly or indirectly cause them physical or mental harm using contemporary telecommunications networks like the Internet and mobile phones (Okeshola $\&$ Adeta, 2013). Because everyone on the planet, whether in the public or private sector, is vulnerable to them since we are living in the information age, even though cybercrimes are a relatively new phenomenon, they have become the focus of global attention (Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science, 1977). In particular, cybercrimes first appeared with the development of the Internet, creating a favourable environment for crimes perpetrated by cybercriminals (Ajayi, 2016). Computers are either the target of cybercrime or are a tool used to commit the crime. A cybercriminal may disable a device or utilise it to get access to a user’s private information, sensitive corporate information, or government information. Selling or obtaining the aforementioned information online is a cybercrime. Aghatise (2014) describes cybercrime as a crime carried out online using a computer as either a tool or a specific target. The increasing reliance of society on computer systems and the development of its technological capabilities might be seen as a cause of cybercrime and technology abuse. According to Herselman and Warren (2013), cybercrime has no geographical borders and is not subject to import, customs, or foreign exchange restrictions, making it a target for anyone in the globe.  

Three broad categories can be used to categorise cybercrimes: those committed against people, those committed against property, and those committed against the government. Cybercrimes against people encompass a variety of offences including sending child pornography and harassing anyone using a computer or email. known today as cybercrimes. Cybercrimes against all types of property fall under the second category of cybercrimes. These offences include the dissemination of malicious programs and computer vandalism (the destruction of another person’s property). Government-related cybercrimes make up the third type of cybercrimes. One specific type of crime in this category is cyberterrorism. The expansion of the internet has demonstrated that both people and groups are using cyberspace as a means of terrorising a nation’s citizens as well as posing a threat to other nations. When a person “cracks” into a website run by the government or the military, this offence takes on terrorist characteristics (Ayofe & Irwin, 2010). According to Tade and Aliyu (2011), cybercrime is a highly networked crime. It entails “geographic coding” and the disclosure of government information to deceive online users. Because it permits the unrestrained expression of norms and values that encourage crime as opposed to the regulated norms and values of the physical realm, the Internet thus provides a platform for cybercriminals.  

# Phenomenon of Cybercrime  

The threat of cybercrime to national security, economic growth, citizenry quality of life, and the world as a whole is ever-evolving in cyberspace. Rapid internet adoption and the digitisation of commercial processes have given rise to a new generation of criminals. Globally, cybercrime has increased at an unprecedented rate in recent years. The fastest-growing type of international crime nowadays is cybercrime (Pedro, 2020). One of the biggest, most baffling, and possibly most complicated problems in the digital world is cybercrime (Okpa et al., 2020). The beginning of cybercrime can be attributed to a few unhappy workers who physically harmed the computers they used to retaliate against their supervisors. Cybercriminals started concentrating their efforts on the home user as the capacity to have personal computers at home grew more available and well-liked (Obiora et al., 2017). According to Guillaume and Fortinet (2009), the proliferation of personal computers and computer networks turned “computer crime” into actual cybercrime.  

In the year 1820, the first “cybercrime” was officially documented. That is not surprising considering that India, Japan, and China have all used abacuses, which are regarded to be the earliest type of computer, since 3500 BC. However it was Charles Babbage’s analytical engine that gave rise to the current era of computers (Khan, 2011). Cyberspace has proven robust to attacks, but the fundamental dynamic of the online world has always been that it is simpler to attack than to protect, according to the World Economic Forum’s Global Risks (2014) report. The rising level of internet insecurity is worrying to the point where online transactions are now questioned (Ayofe & Irwin, 2010). Cybercrime is getting worse and more common. Acts of cybercrime are widespread worldwide and motivated by money. Such computer-related fraud is widespread and accounts for about one-third of all crimes committed worldwide. One of the biggest legal grey areas today is cybercrime, which has spawned a variety of new crimes including identity theft, privacy invasion, sabotage, espionage, burglary, conspiracy, embezzlement, bribery, larceny, extortion, and even more brutal offences like attempted murder, kidnapping, and manslaughter (Laura, 2011). According to McConnel (2000), there are four key ways that cybercrimes differ from most terrestrial crimes: they are simple to learn, require low resources compared to the potential harm they might inflict, can be conducted in a jurisdiction without being physically there, and are frequently legal. As a result, cybercrime has grown to be one of the world’s and law enforcement organisations’ top security concerns. Cybercrime is defined as any criminal behaviour using the infrastructure of information technology, including unauthorised access, unauthorised interception, tampering with data or systems, tampering with identity, and electronic fraud. Cybercrime and traditional crime are not dissimilar from one another.  

# Cybercrime in Africa: Nature, Causes, and Implications  

Incidences of cybercrime are increasing rapidly on the African continent. This is possibly a result of the increase in internet users in Africa (Ndubueze, 2019). Between 2000 and 2016, the information and communications technology sector in Africa increased by $7.00\%$ , with internet penetration reaching around $28\%$ (Adanikin, 2018). Internet adoption increased from $5\%$ in 2007 to $28\%$ in 2015, closing the digital divide between Africa and the rest of the world. Within the next ten years, Africa should have access rates comparable to those of the developed world (Chinweze et al., 2019), assuming this growth pace is maintained.  

Utilising ICT, and particularly the Internet, has become a strategic issue. These innovations not only promote economic growth but also increase productivity, efficiency, and innovation throughout the continent and promote the free exchange of ideas and information.  

Regarding security risks, violation of intellectual property, and the protection of personal data, Africa is currently dealing with several internet-related issues. The majority of African governments lack the technological or financial resources to identify and monitor electronic exchanges deemed critical for national security (Chawe, 2021; Ogunleye et al., 2022). As a result, cybercriminals target people both inside and outside of their national borders. The internet’s quick development has also opened up new avenues for cybercrime, which is projected to cost African economies over one billion US dollars annually. As internet use spreads throughout all aspects of our socioeconomic life, including electronic banking, electronic commerce, electronic education, and electronic governance, new types of cybercrimes are emerging (Obiora et al., 2017). Since many computer systems are not adequately safeguarded, a lot of cybercrime originates from the African continent, where it is also easy for these threats to propagate. Considerable risk of online abuse exists in Africa. This is because law enforcement organisations do not have security awareness programs or specialised training.  

As cyberattacks have increased in frequency over the past 20 years, they have become a significant problem in Africa. Since many computer systems are not adequately safeguarded, a lot of cybercrime originates from the African continent, where it is also easy for these threats to propagate. According to Quarshie and Martin-Odoom (2012), this demonstrates how the continent is susceptible to a variety of online criminal activities, like financial fraud, drug and human trafficking, and terrorism. Nigeria, the top-ranked nation in the area, is frequently the target and the origin of malicious internet activities, which are spreading across the continent (Quarshie & Martin-Odoom, 2012). Africa is increasingly becoming a key source of cybercrimes. Without question, there is a lot of potential for internet abuse in Africa. This is because law enforcement organisations do not have security awareness programs or specialised training.  

Africans have given cybercrime their own names. For instance, it is referred to as “Sakawa” or “Yahoo yahoo” in Ghana (Coomsom, 2009), “Faymania” in Cameroon (Oumarou, 2007), and “yahoo boys” in Nigeria (Adeniran, 2008; Longe & Chiemeke, 2008; Tade & Aliyu, 2011). However, compared to any Western or Asian nation, Africa is more commonly referred to as a “continent of cybercriminals” in the public sphere (Das & Nayak, 2013). This is true for two reasons: first, African nations have recently suffered from poor governance, and second, victims of African fraudsters experience both financial and emotional losses (Ajah & Chukwuemeka, 2019). In Africa, there are primarily two categories of cybercriminals: “Yahoo boys” and “next-level cybercriminals.” Under the direction of ringleaders or masterminds, Yahoo guys excel at committing straightforward fraud (advance fee, stranded traveller, and romantic scams/fraud). Next-level cybercriminals, on the other hand, are more skilled and like carrying out “long cons” (such as tax scams/ fraud and business email compromise [BEC]) or crimes that need more time, resources, and effort. They employ software that facilitates crime, such as email automation and phishing tools, that is readily available from black markets, such as malware (keyloggers, remote access tools/Trojans [RATs], etc.) (TrendLabs, 2016).  

Scholars have focused on the socioeconomic impact of cybercrime and its rapid and persistent expansion. It is generally known that cybercrime has had a significant impact on the economies of many African nations (Ogunleye et al., 2022). Africa has experienced a sharp increase in cybercrime in recent years, making it one of the world’s most exposed areas to cyber threats. Because the continent lacks a strong cybersecurity architecture, cybercriminals are increasingly targeting African nations with highly sophisticated attacks (Fra˛ckiewicz, 2023). The second most frequently reported crime in Africa, after fraud, is cybercrime, according to a survey by the African Union. This demonstrates that Africa has had one of the greatest rates of growth for cybercrime (Norris et al., 2019). Additionally, substantial cyberattacks against the rest of the world originate from the continent.  

Cybercrimes impact all nations, but Africa is particularly at risk due to its underdeveloped networks and security. Over $90\%$ of firms on the continent are reportedly operating without the essential cybersecurity processes in place, according to Interpol’s Africa Cyberthreat Assessment Report. Cybercrime cost Africa’s GDP $\$4$ billion in 2021 or $10\%$ of its total GDP. According to Odueso (2022), cybercrime costs Africa $\$4$ billion every year. More specifically, Mitchell (2022) said that although the region’s insufficient efforts to combat cybercrime could hamper this rise, the continent’s e-economy is anticipated to reach $\$180$ billion annually by 2025. Africa is said to lose $\$4$ billion a year to cybercrime. According to estimates by Onuora et al. (2017), it costs the economies of South Africa $\$570$ million annually, Nigeria $\$500$ million, and Kenya $\$36$ million.  

Despite the ongoing problem of cybercrime, Kshetri (2019a) noted that many African economies view cybersecurity as a luxury rather than a need. Its significance in the continent is still not properly understood or acknowledged. According to reports, many businesses’ cybersecurity budgets are less than $1\%$ , and many of them have no budget at all (Ogunleye et al., 2022). Globally, billions of dollars are lost each year as a result of cybercrime, which also poses a threat to the security and economic well-being of a country. A company can also sustain losses as a result of computer crime when a hacker steals its private data and business plans (Anah et al., 2012). Similar to traditional crimes, cybercrimes include child exploitation, online gambling, online prostitution, and similar activities that erode society’s morality and increase the likelihood that societal norms and values may disintegrate (Folashade & Abimbola, 2013). According to Shehu (2014), from a societal standpoint, cybercrime activities including cyberstalking, harassment, blackmail, and cyberterrorism pose a threat to a person’s right to privacy and fundamental freedoms.  

# An Overview of Cybersecurity Strategy  

The ongoing use of the Internet by immoral cyberspace users to conduct crimes over the past 20 years has caused a growing sense of dread among the general public as well as conflicting feelings of admiration and fear. Recently, this phenomenon has grown increasingly complex and remarkable, necessitating a prompt response in the form of regulations that would safeguard cyberspace and its users (Makeri, 2017). Technical, organisational, policy, and legal considerations are all part of cybersecurity governance measures. The development of regulations that forbid any actions that compromise the confidentiality, integrity, and accessibility of data, systems, and vital information infrastructure is another aspect of promoting strong cybersecurity (Gumbi, 2018). To protect an organisation’s and a user’s assets from relevant security risks in the cyber environment, cybersecurity aims to ensure their attainment and maintenance. The set of regulations established for the protection of cyberspace is known as cybersecurity. However, as our reliance on the internet grows, there are new dangers.  

According to Oforji et al. (2017), cybersecurity is the defence of cyberspace and other related technologies, including records and electronic data as well as physical structures and security measures. Information security is a field in which cybersecurity is crucial (Kavitha & Preetha, 2019). Cybersecurity can serve as a safeguard against unauthorised monitoring of and intelligence collection from an information system. In the continual evolution of information technology and internet services, cybersecurity is crucial. Each country’s security and economic health depend on enhancing cybersecurity and safeguarding vital information infrastructure. Making cyberspace safe from threats, namely cyber threats, is the goal of cybersecurity. Because information security is at the core of the issue, cybersecurity is more than just information security or data security but is nonetheless intimately tied to those two subjects. All facets of information protection are referred to as information security (Olayemi, 2014). The preventive technique or practice known as cybersecurity is used to protect the integrity and dependability of networks, programs, and data from harm, intrusion, or unauthorised access. It entails safeguarding data and systems from common cyber threats such as cyberterrorism, cyberwarfare, and cyber espionage. The goals of cybersecurity, according to Makeri (2017), are as follows:  

. To help people reduce the vulnerability of their Information and Communication Technology systems and networks.   
. To help individuals and institutions develop and nurture a culture of cybersecurity.   
. To work collaboratively with public, private, and international entities to secure cyberspace.   
. To help understand the current trends in IT/cybercrime and develop effective solutions.   
Availability.   
. Integrity, which may include authenticity and non-repudiation, and   
. Confidentiality.  

Cybersecurity has grown to become a national issue as the risk it now requires to be taken more seriously (Ibikunle, 2013). Improving cybersecurity and guarding vital information infrastructures are essential to national security and economic well-being (Odinma, 2010). The challenges of cybersecurity in Africa include:  

Lesser security availability is adequate to avert and manage technological and informational threats.   
. Deficiency of technical know-how regarding cybersecurity and failure to watch or monitor and secure national networks, making Nigeria and several African countries susceptible to cyber espionage, and incidences of cyber terrorism.   
. Failure to develop and improve the required cybersecurity legal structure to battle cybercrime. Cybersecurity issues are more extensive in scope than national security concerns. However, few major significant cybersecurity measures in Africa have their implementation done. Cybersecurity is a serious concern that needs absolute tackling.   
. There is also a necessity to develop an information society that respects values, rights, and freedoms and assures the same access to information, even stirring up the establishment of genuine knowledge that can put up assurance and confidence in the use of ICTs in Africa.   
. Limited levels of consciousness of ICT-related security concerns by stakeholders, like ICT regulators, law enforcement agencies, the judiciary, information technology professionals and users (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014)  

It is essential that, among other current government priorities, the subject of cyber security receives the highest level of attention. Cybersecurity issues are currently undoubtedly garnering attention on a global scale. Given its importance, policymakers, governments, and other interested parties are compelled to carefully design guiding principles in the form of policies and strategies to be used in governing cybersecurity-related issues (Osho & Onoja, 2015).  

When considered on a worldwide scale, cybersecurity has recently progressively and certainly taken a more prominent position. This is due to its potentially positive effects if handled properly as well as potential negative effects if neglected on a national level. This has led to the elevation of cybersecurity-related issues to the status of crucial national concerns and top priorities in many different nations throughout the world. As seen in numerous nations on every continent, this has caused national cybersecurity initiatives to spring up all over the world. From the military and national defence viewpoint, Watanabe (2013) assessed France’s Cyber Security Strategy, taking into account its capabilities, obligations, and potential for improving national cybersecurity. He emphasized that the French government’s white paper on cybersecurity acts as a tool for adapting to recent changes in the strategic environment. S¸entürk et al. (2012), Nitta (2013), and Watanabe (2013) all acknowledged the crucial worldwide role the United States played in advancing cybersecurity. ¸Sentürk et al. (2012) stated in their examination of the Turkish cybersecurity strategy that the national cybersecurity strategy of the United States is considered as being the most investigated among others, showing the country’s lofty cybersecurity worldwide relevance. In her examination of the Japanese cybersecurity strategy, Nitta (2013) made an effort to identify several flaws and suggest remedies. She commended Japan for moving toward greater international cooperation while promoting national cybersecurity independence.  

The Cybersecurity Strategy in Canada approaches national security in cyberspace from the unique vantage point of safeguarding vital national infrastructure. This can be seen from the three key pillars of the policy, which are helping Canadians stay safe online, securing government networks, and collaborating to secure all crucial cyber systems outside the federal government. These were primarily designed to combat three types of threats, including state-sponsored military activity and cyber espionage, terrorist internet use, and cybercrime (Government of Canada, 2010). The National Cyber Security Strategy of France reflects the widespread use of contemporary cyber technology by its people. Therefore, it concentrated on becoming a global leader in cyber defence while also developing and safeguarding National Information Infrastructures and information relevant to sovereignty. Collectively, France approaches cybersecurity from a defensive stance in its strategy (French Network & Information Security Agency, 2011).  

In its Cyber Security Strategy from 2011, the UK put special emphasis on the huge social and economic value that can be derived from a safe, active, and resilient cyberspace. The basic values were intended to boost the economy and strengthen national security in the UK (Osho & Onoja, 2015). The Netherlands’ National Cyber Security Strategy intends to transform the country’s cybersecurity posture from awareness to capabilities. After gaining a better understanding of cyber threats, the Netherlands developed a strategy that aims to take a fresh approach to cybersecurity problems by stepping up efforts to counter them rather than raising awareness of their existence (National Coordinator for Security & Counterterrorism, 2014). The main goal of Japan’s National Cyber Security Strategy was to defend the country’s information system from widespread cyberattacks, which have grown more and more popular in recent years. To provide the best possible supply of security for national information systems, several well-developed action plans were recommended for implementation (Information Security Policy Council, 2010). Cybersecurity measures, such as the creation of technical defences or user education to shield them from being victims of cybercrime, can aid in lowering the risk of cybercrime. In the struggle against cybercrime, the creation and support of cybersecurity initiatives are essential.  

# Fighting Cybercrime in Africa: Issues, Challenges and Remedial Actions  

Although a crimeless society is a myth, crime is an omnipresent phenomenon, and it is an inseparable part of social existence. No one can deny that crime is a social phenomenon, it is omnipresent, and there is nothing new in crime as it is one of the characteristic features of all societies, be it developed or developing, and it is one of the basic instincts of all human behaviour. However, it should be borne in mind that the social concern for the high crime rate is not because of its nature, but due to the potential disturbance, it causes to society (Sumanjit & Tapaswini, 2013).  

Experts and politicians have grown more concerned in recent years about safeguarding ICT systems from cyberattacks, which are purposeful attempts by unauthorised individuals to gain access to ICT systems with the intent of committing theft, disruption, destruction, or other illegal acts. According to several analysts, during the coming years, cyberattacks will become more frequent and more severe (Rainie et al., 2014). Cybercrime is a serious issue that threatens both personal freedom and the integrity of the Internet, as well as the growth of technology (Olumoye, 2013). The entire society is impacted by cybercriminals’ wrongdoings, although they may believe their acts have no victims in the vicious circle. A comprehensive and coordinated strategy is needed to combat cybercrime, however, in Africa, poverty and underdevelopment are major causes for the growth of cybercrime in the region. There are significant obstacles to the fight against cybercrime. However, the majority of African nations face difficulties like (i) never-ending cyber wars (supremacy disputes) between law enforcement, intelligence, and security agencies; (ii) a lack of collaboration between the public and private sectors in the fight against cybercrime; and (iii) inadequacy in the policy option that addresses the issues of surveillance. However, the recommendations are crucial to reduce the frequency of cybercrimes in Africa. Although it cannot be completely stopped, cybercrime can be reduced. The government, businesses, and individuals working together might do a lot to bring it down to a manageable level. According to Hassan et al. (2012), the threat of cybercrime in Africa must be addressed by enacting the required legislation to enforce property rights. However, this will only be possible if property owners take reasonable precautions to secure their property in the first place. Africa is undoubtedly plagued by a variety of sociopolitical, economic, and insurgency-related issues as well as other crimes. This reduces their ability to address cybercrime effectively. However, African nations must take action to make sure that their criminal and procedural laws are sufficient to handle the problems created by cybercrimes.  

# Chapter Content  

The prevalence and the proliferation of cybercrime have received global attention (Lewis, 2018). This book focuses on the prevalence and the phenomenon of cybercrime in Africa. It adopts a multidisciplinary approach, written by scholars from different backgrounds and disciplines. The book comprises ten (10) chapters, focusing on different aspects of cybercrimes and the implication of the match towards the attainment of sustainable development in Africa.  

In the introduction to the book, Stanley Ehiane and Mosud Olumoye discuss the historical context of cybercrime as an emergent phenomenon in Africa. According to the author, a variety of internet criminal activities, such as financial fraud, drug trafficking, human trafficking, and terrorism, can target Africa as a continent. As a result, Africa is developing into a “safe haven” for online scammers. This indicates that more cybercrimes are being committed in Africa. Despite an upsurge in studies on cybercrime over the past ten years, the subject is still important and understudied, especially from a social science standpoint. Nevertheless, some African nations are trying to implement security measures that can assist in fighting this ailment. Even though these initiatives are ongoing, they have been largely ineffective at repealing cybercrime. This reveals that the way forward is for Africa to learn from the experiences of developed countries in fighting cybercrime.  

Chapter two written by Sphamandla Lindani Nkosi and Sogo Angel Olofinbiyi analyses the types of cybercrime that occur in South Africa with a focus on the economic impact of identity theft. The chapter investigates and estimates the damage that identity theft has done to South Africa’s economy as well as the suffering that victims—citizens and business sectors—have gone through because of the fraudulent acts related to identity theft. It outlines several socioeconomic issues, such as unemployment, that exacerbate identity theft. It contends that ongoing encryption of sensitive data is crucial and that periodic inspection and maintenance of cybersecurity measures stand as two essential preventative strategies.  

In Chapter 3, Vuyelwa Kemiso Maweni, Aden Dejene Tolla, and Sphamandla Lindani Nkosi concentrate on the nature of cybercrime in poor societies and describe how technology facilitates human trafficking. They contend that technology makes it simpler for traffickers to find, entice, control, and coerce their victims. The more sophisticated end of the trafficker spectrum uses technology and the Internet, both of which are tools for cybercrime. Through phones, emails, instant messaging, websites, phone applications, and other means of communication, the Internet gives traffickers access to a larger pool of possible victims. Since conventional physical and geographic barriers no longer exist, the Internet today easily connects a far bigger number of potential victims. The chapter explains the many strategies criminals employ to find their victims of sex trafficking online, with a focus on Ethiopia, Nigeria, and South Africa.  

In Chapter 4, Samuel Fikiri Cinini, Stanley Ehiane, Osaiyi Fadekemi Janet, and Irewunmi Banwo focus on new challenges in Africa and cybersecurity. The protection of personal data has grown increasingly important as digital technologies are used more frequently in industries like healthcare and education. Lack of capability is one of the main issues facing Africa in terms of cybersecurity. This pertains to both a shortage of qualified individuals and a lack of funding. Simply put, many African nations lack the infrastructure and knowledge needed to effectively combat cyber attacks. The chapter looked at the rise of cybersecurity in Africa and the many cyber threats that have emerged recently. It also provided an overview of the African Union Convention on Cybersecurity and Personal Data Protection and the difficulties the continental body has faced in tackling these issues. The chapter suggests that Africa must take full advantage of the digital revolution to empower its citizens and enhance transparency in government and the private sector. This will not happen until data is stored in safe and trusted systems that protect privacy and are difficult for criminals to breach.  

Anthony Minnaar in Chapter 5 paid to the threat from and risk from cybercrime has been increasing over time, both in terms of the number of reported cyberattacks and the level of complexity of those attacks. Every year, ransomware incidents and the additional expenditures associated with installing better protection measures result in considerable financial losses for enterprises, individuals, and the public sector. Cybercrime is appealing to criminals due to the potential and lucrative profits as well as the low risk of detection, physical detention (being a so-called “borderless” but still international crime), and the challenge of authorities bringing charges against “absent” and challenging to track and trace suspected culprits.  

Chapter 6, written by Sazelo Michael  Mkhize  focused on drug trafficking and the Internet. Over the past few decades, the war on drugs has been a major source of worry. The abuse and trafficking of narcotic and psychoactive substances have long been a problem, but it has become worse with the advent and diffusion of new technologies, particularly the Internet. Over the past ten years, the Internet’s explosive expansion has brought about unheard-of shifts in criminal activity, creating new chances and infrastructure for these kinds of crimes. The African continent has developed over the past ten years into a major route for drug exports, a source of illegally obtained natural resources, a starting place for human trafficking, and a route for migrant smuggling. Drugs are cleverly disguised to hide their origins and avoid scrutiny, making Africa one of the main transhipment routes for drug trafficking. The use of the Internet as a means of drug distribution creates both new investigation obstacles and opportunities for skilled investigators.  

Slindile Ngcece and Sazelo Michael Mkhize in chapter seven analyzed the role played by the South African Police Service in battling cybercrime. For police agencies, the threat of cybercrime is becoming more and more challenging. The development of advanced techniques to commit cybercrime has made it more difficult and time-consuming to implement and investigate. South Africa is among the top 10 nations on the list of cybercrime predators, however. Cybercrimes have been the subject of extensive research. However, there is still much to be learned about this subject, especially regarding how law enforcement agencies have handled the difficulties presented by online crimes and whether the South African legal system has been successful in reining in cybercriminals. The chapter identified a lack of cooperation among pertinent role-players to increase internal resources for cybercrime investigation, which led to capacity issues with handling the workload.  

Claudine Anita Hingston and Danita Hingston in Chapter 8 focus on the nature of human trafficking. They view human trafficking, which is one of the world’s fastest-growing illegal sectors, as being equivalent to slavery. Cyberspace enables traffickers to abuse more victims globally and carry out new trafficking operations while the traditional channels of human trafficking continue to exist. Human trafficking has evolved into one of the biggest global organised crimes as a result of the development of technology. Traffickers use social media to masquerade as victims, disseminate false information, disseminate intimate photos, or even continue to monitor a victim’s account activity after they have left the trafficker. The four steps of trafficking—recruitment, transportation, victim exploitation, and management of illicit profits—were highlighted in the chapter. Offenders exploit digital tools at each of these four stages of the trafficking cycle. It implies that because of how serious human trafficking is, how it violates human rights, and how badly it affects its victims, this topic must continuously be at the forefront of research.  

In chapter nine, Ndivhuwo Doctor Sundani focuses on the methods for preventing human trafficking on South African online platforms. The increased use of digital technologies in Africa is fostering the expansion of human trafficking operations there. It was found that the development of social media and the Internet have provided traffickers with more opportunities to seduce victims. The possibility of raising awareness of human trafficking is growing. The underlying economic, political, and cultural issues must be resolved for South Africa to succeed in its fight against human trafficking. Additionally, groups that serve as a conduit between key players, the government, and victims require more support.  

Shandu Smangele and Maluleke Witness in chapter ten highlighted in South Africa the perceptions and trends of electronic tax fraud filing. In the KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) Province of South Africa, the chapter analyzes current perspectives on investigations and prosecutions of electronicFiling (Tax) fraud. Tax fraud happens when taxpayers don’t pay their taxes on time or use shady tactics to get out of paying back taxes. Therefore, one of the things preventing South Africa from collecting taxes is tax fraud. To evade tax requirements, such as paying annual tax on any money generated, people who engage in lawful activities such as barter and financial transactions often conceal the real and taxable income they have made. This practice is known as the shadow economy. The chapter makes the case that taxes are an essential component in ensuring that South Africa’s economy remains strong for years to come. The authors advised the local SAPS DPCI to request an upgrade to the SARS e-Filing system so that it can better track applicants’ history and identify fraudulent information. Accountable investigators should carefully examine current trends to enhance their current investigation methods.  

# Concluding Remarks  

Africa is reportedly the continent where cybercrime is expanding the fastest. Internet users have increased because of the expansion of broadband services across the continent (Ojedokun, 2015). African countries are increasingly using the Internet to carry out sensitive business and retain vital information. Cybercriminals are targeting the continent as a result of the majority of African states’ shortcomings in bolstering cybersecurity and combating cybercrime. The problem of cybercrime and its detrimental effects on Africa are worrying and demoralising. To combat the threat and lessen its impact on the populace, the governments of Africa must adopt a proactive and laser-like focus. Africa needs to be developed into a society free from crime to serve as a productive foundation for economic breakthrough. Criminals who operate online will always stay current with technological developments. Indeed, technology contributes to cybercrime; we can either accept this or take significant action to address it. We must recognise that the difficulty of law enforcement organisations and individuals to bring criminal charges against online fraudsters feeds the cycle of online fraud (Boateng et al., 2019). Policymakers will need to put into place effective measures to prevent the surge of cyber threats if they want Africa to reach its full potential. Hitherto, Africa must start working together to combat cyber threats at the national and regional levels. Africa should create a body to keep track of and report international cybercrimes.  

To meet the upcoming difficulties of cybercrime, Africa needs strong information and computer technology institutions to train cybersecurity experts with significant skills in system administration, security audit, forensic investigation, information security, and software development. Pedro (2020) argues that to avoid and stop new criminality trends, we must constantly make modifications to the way we prevent and secure the cyberspace environment. These efforts have expanded well beyond the conventional boundaries of the Law Enforcement Agencies’ workplace. The issue of cybersecurity needs to be taken seriously since it is affecting how the world perceives the continent. The public, cybercafés, the government, security agencies, and internet users must all contribute to the development of a security-aware culture. It is unreasonable to expect states to adopt the entire agreement right away, so African states should concentrate on the convention’s sections about cybersecurity and cybercrime first. African nations must support capacity-building initiatives and sign on to international accords against cybercrime that extends beyond the continent. These steps will have the most immediate effect in curbing the growth of cybercrime in Africa and worldwide. African states that fail to adequately address the evolving cybercrime problem will jeopardise their economic growth and national security. Unless and until there is a broad global agreement on criminalising cybercrime and robust international cooperation to enforce those laws, cybercriminals operating in cybercrime safe havens will continue to target individuals, businesses, and governments with impunity.  

# References  

Abdul-Rasheed Ishowo, S. L., Muhammed, L. A., & Abdullateef, Y. R. (2016). Cybercrime and Nigeria’s external image: A critical assessment. Africology: The Journal of Pan African Studies, 9(6), 119–132.   
Adanikin, O. (2018, May 3, Thursday). Cybercrooks attempt to steal $\$3.90$ from the maritime sector. The Nations Newspaper, $12~\mathrm{pp}$ .   
Adeniran, A. (2008). The internet and the emergence of Yahoo boys sub-culture in Nigeria. International Journal of Cyber Criminology (IJCC), 2(2), 368– 381.   
Adewole, K. S., Isiaka, R. M., & Olayemi, R. T. (2021). An inquiry into the awareness level of cyber security policy and measures in Nigeria. Journal of Science and Advanced Technology, 1(7), 91–96.   
Aghatise, J. (2014, September 5). Cybercrime definition. https://www.resear chgate.net/publication/265350281_Cybercrime_definition. Accessed 14 Nov 2021.   
Ajah, B. O., & Chukwuemeka, O. D. (2019). Neo-economy and militating effects of Africa’s profile on cybercrime. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 13(2), 326–342.   
Ajayi, E. F. G. (2016). Challenges to enforcement of cyber-crimes laws and policy. Journal of Internet and Information Systems, $\delta(1)$ , 1–12.   
Akogwu, S. (2012). An assessment of the level of awareness on cybercrime among internet users in Ahmadu Bello University. Zaria. Unpublished B.Sc. project.   
Akuta, E. A., Ong’oa, I. M., & Jones, C. R. (2011). Combating cyber-crime in Sub-Sahara Africa: A discourse on law, policy and practice. Journal of Peace, Gender and Development Studies, 1(4), 129–137.   
Al-Shalam, A. (2022). Cybercrime fear and victimization: An analysis of a national survey [Ph.D dissertation submitted to Mississippi State University].   
Anah, B., Funmi, D., & Makinde, J. (2012). Cybercrime in Nigeria: Causes, effects and the way out. ARPN Journal of Science and Technology, 1(2), 193– 195.   
Aribake, F. O., & Aji, Z. M. (2022). The mediating role of perceived security on the relationship between internet banking users and their determinants. International Journal of Advanced Research in Engineering and Technology, 11(2), 296–318.   
Ayofe, A. M., & Irwin, B. (2010). Cybersecurity: Challenges and the way forward. Computer Science and Telecommunications, 6(29), 56–69.   
Bande, L. C. (2018). Legislating against cybercrime in Southern African development community: Balancing international standards with country-specific specificities. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 12(1), 9–26.   
Boateng, R., Long, O., Mbarika, V., & Avevor, I. (2019). Cyber crime and criminality in Ghana: Its forms and implications. Americas Conference on Information System, 507.   
Chawe, M. (2021, June 14). Cybercrime costs Zambian banks $\$40$ . Africa Review. www.africareview.com/News/Cybercrime-costs-Zambian-banks-- $-4\mathrm{mi}$ llio/-/979180/1883006/-/128vr2iz/-/index.html   
Chiluwa, I. M., Kamalu, I., & Anurudu, S. (2022). Deceptive transparency and masked discourses in Ponzi schemes: A critical discourse analysis of MMM Nigeria. Critical Discourse Studies, 19(1), 55–72.   
Chinweze, U. C., Chukwuemeka, O. D., & Egbegi, F. R. (2019). An exploratory study of cybercrime in the contemporary Nigeria value system. European Journal of Social Sciences Studies, 4(3), 131–141.   
Coomson, J. (2009, October 4). Cybercrimes in Ghana. Ghanaian Chronicle. http://allafrica.com/stories/200610040856.html. Accessed 12 July 2023.   
Dalal, P. (2006). Wireless security: Some measures. Computer Crime Research Center. http://www.crime-research.org/articles. Accessed 23 Apr 2022.   
Danquah, P., & Longe, O. B. (2021). Cyber deception and theft: An ethnographic study on cyber criminality from a Ghanaian perspective. Journal of Information Technology Impact, 11(3), 169–182.   
Das, S., & Nayak, T. (2013). Impact of cybercrime: Issues and challenges. International Journal of Engineering Sciences & Emerging Technologies, 6(2), 142–153.   
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. (1977). https://books.goo gle.co.bw/books/aboutEncyclopedia_of_Library_and_Information.html?id $\c=$ MCwqxVvW3zMC&redir_esc=y. Accessed 14 May 2023.   
European Commission. (2013). Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace, Brussels JOIN, 2013, 1.   
Folashade, B. O., & Abimbola, K. A. (2013). The nature causes and consequences of cybercrime in tertiary institutions in Zaria-Kaduna State, Nigeria. American International Journal of Contemporary Research, 3(9), 98–114.   
Fra˛ckiewicz, M. (2023). The importance of cybersecurity in Africa’s Digital Age. https://ts2.space/en/the-importance-of-cybersecurity-in-africas-digitalage/. Accessed 10 July 2023.   
French Network and Information Security Agency. (2011). Information systems defense and security—France’s strategy. Retrieved April 23, 2021, from http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/french-cybersecuritystrategy-2011. Accessed 8 July 2023.   
Goodman, M. D., & Brenner, S. (2022). The emerging consensus on criminal conduct in cyberspace. International Journal of Law and Information Technology, 10(2), 139–223 at 142, 146–150.   
Government of Canada. (2010). Canada’s cybersecurity strategy. www.publicsaf ety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/cbr-sctr-strtgy/index-eng.aspx. Accessed 12 Mar 2022.   
Green, B., Gies, S., Bobnis, A., Piquero, N. L., Piquero, A. R., & Velasquez, E. (2020). The role of victim services for individuals who have experienced serious identity-based crime. Victims and Offenders, 15(6), 720–743.   
Guillaume, L., & Fortinet, D. (2009). Fighting cybercrime: Technical, juridical and ethical. https://www.virusbulletin.com/conference/vb2009/abstracts/ fighting-cybercrime-technical-juridical-and-ethical-challenges/. Accessed 12 May 2023.   
Gumbi, D. (2018). Understanding the threat of cybercrime: A comparative study of cybercrime and the ICT legislative frameworks of South Africa, Kenya, India, the United States and the United Kingdom. A thesis submitted to the University of Cape Town as part of the requirements for the award of Master of Law (LLM) Degree.   
Hassan, A. B., Lass, F. D., & Makinde, J. (2012). Cybercrime in Nigeria: Causes, effects and the way out. ARPN Journal of Science and Technology, 2(7), 1–6.   
Herselman, M., & Warren, M. (2013). Cybercrime influencing businesses in South Africa. Issues in Information Science and Information Technology, 3(2), 253–266.   
Hunda, R. S., Singh, K., & Singh, M. D. (2014). Aspects to ensure admissibility of digital evidence. Law Journal, Gurn Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 13(1), 1–10.   
Ibikunle, A. (2022). Investigation of computer crime in information technology industry [Unpublished Master’s Thesis]. Ladoke Akintola University of Technology.   
Ibikunle, F., & Eweniyi, O. (2013). Approach to cybersecurity issues in Nigeria: Challenges and solution. International Journal of Cognitive Research in science, engineering and education, 1(1), 1–11. http://www.scribd.com/doc/ 71120466/. Accessed 4 June 2022.   
Information Security Policy Council. (2010). Information security strategy for protecting the Nation. www.nisc.go.jp/eng/pdf/New_Strategy_English.pdf. Accessed 15 July 2022.   
Institute for Security Studies. (2022). Africa can’t risk a major maritime cyberattack. https://issAfrica.org/iss-today/Africa-cant-risk-a-major-maritime-cybera ttack.   
Jerome-Orji, U. (2019). An inquiry into the legal status of the ECOWAS cybercrime directive and the implications of its obligations for member states. Computer Law and Security Review, 35(6), 105330.   
Kavitha, V., & Preetha, S. (2019). Cybersecurity issues and challenges: A review. International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, 8(11), 1–6.   
Khan, A. (2011). The-first recorded-cyber-crime-took-place-in-the-year-1820. http://www.scribd.com/doc/71120466/. Accessed 12 June 2022.   
Kshetri, N. (2013). Cybercrime and cybersecurity in the Global South. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Kshetri, N. (2019a). Cybercrime and cybersecurity in Africa. Journal of Global Information Technology Management, 22(2), 77–81.   
Kshetri, N. (2019b). The economics of click fraud. IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine, 8(3), 45–53.   
Laura, A. (2005, 2011). Cyber crime and national security: The role of the penal and procedural law. Research Fellow, Nigerian Institute of Advanced Legal Studies.   
Lewis, J. (2018). Economic impact of cybercrime: No slowing down. Centre for Strategic and International Studies. https://www.csis.org/analysis/economicimpact-cybercrime. Accessed 12 May 2023.   
Longe, O. B., & Chiemeke, S. C. (2008). Mediated cyber-crime: An investigation of the role of internet access points in the facilitation of cybercrime in Southwest Nigeria. European Journal of Social Sciences, 6, 466–472.   
Maitanmi, O., Ogunlere, S., Ayinde, S., & Adekunle, Y. (2013). Impact of cybercrimes on Nigerian Economy. The International Journal of Engineering and Science (IJES), 2(4), 19–25.   
Makeri, Y. A. (2017). Cybersecurity issues in Nigeria and challenges. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 7 (4), 315–413.   
Manish, L. (2021). Cyber Laws: A global perspective. http://unpan1.un.org/ intradoc/groups/public/documents/apcity/unpan005846.pdf. Accessed 10 May 2023.   
McConnel, J. C. (2000). Juju and justice at the movies: Vigilantes in Nigerian popular video. African Studies Review, 47 , 51–67.   
McCusker, R. (2006). Transnational organised cybercrime: Distinguishing threat from reality. Crime, Law and Social Change, 46(4&5), 257–273.   
Mitchell, J. (2022). Africa faces huge cybercrime threat as the pace of digitalisation increases. https://www.investmentmonitor.ai/features/africa-cybercrime-threat-digitalisation/. Accessed 7 May 2023.   
National Coordinator for Security and Counterterrorism. (2014). National cybersecurity strategy 2. http://www.enisa.europa.eu/media/news-items/dutchcybersecurity-strategy-2011. Accessed 20 Oct 2021.   
Ndubueze, P. N. (2019). Cybercrime and Legislation in an African Context. In The Palgrave handbook of international cybercrime and cyberdeviance. Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90307-1_74-1. Accessed 6 July 2023.   
Nitta, Y. (2013). Japan’s approach towards an international strategy on cybersecurity cooperation. http://lsgs.georgetown.edu/sites/lsgs/files/Japan_edited% 20v2.pdf_for_printout.pdf. Accessed 25 Oct 2022.   
Norris, G., Brookes, A., & Dowell, D. (2019). The psychology of internet fraud victimisation: A systematic review. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 34(3), 231–245.   
Norton Study. (2012). Consumer cybercrime estimated at \$110 billion annually. www.symantec.com/about/news/release/article.jsp?prid $\c=$ 20120. Accessed 28 Aug 2021.   
Obiora, C. A. O., Tiebiri, J. E. J., & Mmaduabuchi, O. U. (2017). Cybercrimes and the challenges of economic development in Nigeria. NG—Journal of Social Development, 6(4), 59–71.   
Odinma, A. C. (2010, November 1–2). Cybercrime and cert: Issues and probable policies for Nigeria, DBI Presentation.   
Odueso, T. (2022). Africa is losing $\$4$ billion annually to cybercrime. Can conversations at Cyber Africa Forum help? https://techcabal.com/2022/05/06/afr ica-cybercrime-cyber-africa-forum/. Accessed 12 May 2023.   
Oforji, J. C., Udensi, E. J., & Ibegbu, K. C. (2017). Cybersecurity challenges in Nigeria: The way forward. SosPoly Journal of Science & Agriculture, 2, 1–55.   
Oghenevwogaga, T. D. (2017). ICT use and its impact in combating cybercrimes in Abraka, Delta State, Nigeria. Research Journal of Mass Communication and Information Technology, 3(1), 10–24.   
Ogunleye, Y. O., Ojedokun, U. A., & Aderinto, A. A. (2022). Pathways and motivations for cyber fraud involvement among female undergraduates of selected universities in South-West Nigeria. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 13(2), 309–325.   
Ojedokun, A. A. (2015). The evolving sophistication of Internet abusers in Africa. The International Information and Library Review, 37 (1), 11–17.   
Okeshola, F. R., & Adeta, A. K. (2013). The nature causes and consequences of cyber-crime in tertiary institutions in Zaria-Kaduna State, Nigeria. American International Journal of Contemporary Research, 3(9), 98–114.   
Okpa, J. T., Adebayo, I. A., & Emmanuel, E. (2020). Cybercrime and socioeconomic development of corporate organizations in Cross River State, Nigeria. Asian Journal of Scientific Research, 13, 205–213.   
Olalekan, A., & Kamarudeen, O. (2021). Buhari agrees with Cameron that Nigeria is ‘fantastically corrupt’. Punch News. Retrieved from https://pun chng.com/buhariagrees-cameron-nigeria-fantastically-corrupt-2. Accessed 10 May 2023.   
Olayemi, O. J. (2014). A socio-technological analysis of cybercrime and cybersecurity in Nigeria. International Journal of Sociology and Anthropology, $6(3)$ , 116–125.   
Olumoye, M. Y. (2013). Cybercrime and technology misuse: Overview, impacts and preventive measures. European Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology, 1(3), 10–20.   
Onuora, A. C., Uche, D. C., Ogbunude, F. O., & Uwazuruike, F. O. (2017). The challenges of cybercrime in Nigeria: An overview. AIPFU Journal of School of Sciences (AJSS), 1(2), 6–11.   
Osho, O., & Onoja, A. D. (2015). National cybersecurity policy and strategy of Nigeria: A qualitative analysis. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 9(1), 120–143.   
Oumarou, M. (2007). Brainstorming advanced fee fraud: ‘Faymania’—The Camerounian Experience. In N. Ribadu, I. Lamorde, & D. W. Tukura (Eds.), Current trends in advanced fee fraud in West Africa (pp. 33–34). EFCC.   
Pedro, D. (2020, July 27–29). Challenges for cybercrime prevention. In 6th meeting of the intergovernmental expert group on cybercrime in Viena.   
Physorg, L. (2022). Rights group launches tool to stem cybercrime in Africa. https://phys.org/news/2021-05-rights-group-tool-stem-cybercrime.html   
Quarshie, H. O., & Martin-Odoom, A. (2012). Fighting cybercrime in Africa. Computer Science and Engineering, 2(6), 98–100.   
Rainie, L., Anderson, J., & Connolly, J. (2014). Cyber-attacks likely to increase (Pew Research Internet Project, April 2021). http://www.pewInternet.org/ 2021/04/29/cyber-attacks-likely-to-increase/. Accessed 18 June 2022.   
Sabilloni, R., Cano, J., Cavaller, V., & Serra, J. (2016). Cybercrime and cybercriminals: A comprehensive study. International Journal of Computer Networks and Communications Security, 4(6), 165–176.   
Seemma, P. S., Nandhini, S., & Sowmiya, M. (2018). Overview of cybersecurity. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, 7 (11), 125–130.   
S¸ entürk, H., Çil, Z. C., & ¸Seref, S. (2012). Cybersecurity analysis of Turkey. International Journal of Information Security Science, 1(4), 112–125.   
Shehu, A. (2014). Cyber-terrorism: The shape of future conflict. Royal United Service. Available: https://rusi.org/explore-our-research/topics. Accessed 20 July 2022.   
Shinder, D. L. (2002). Scene of the cyber-crime: Computer forensics handbook. Syngress Publishing Inc.   
Solak, D., & Topaloglu, M. (2015). The perception analysis of cybercrimes given computer science students. Procedia: Social and Behavioural Sciences, 182, 590–595.   
Sumanjit, D., & Tapaswini, N. (2013). Impact of cyber-crime: Issues and challenges. International Journal of Engineering Sciences & Emerging Technologies, $6(2)$ , 142–153.   
Symantec Corporation. (2014). Internet Security Threat Report 2013, 2012 Trends. www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resour ces/b-istr_main_report_v18_2012_21291018.enus.pdf.   
Tade, O., & Aliyu, I. (2011). The social organisation of cybercrime among university undergraduates in Nigeria. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 5, 860–875.   
TrendLabs. (2016). Trend Micro Security News. “The Many Faces of Cybercrime.” http://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/us/security/news/cyb ercrime-and-digital-threats/the-many-faces-of-cybercrime. Accessed 15 July 2021.   
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. (2014). Tackling the challenges of Cybersecurity in Africa. Policy Brief, NTIS/002/2014, Economic Commission for Africa.   
Wall, D. (2004). What are cybercrimes? Criminal Justice Matters, 58(1), 20–21.   
Watanabe, L. (2013). France’s new strategy: The 2013 white paper [White paper]. http://www.css.ethz.ch/publications/pdfs/CSSAnalysis-139-EN.pdf. Accessed 16 Nov 2022.   
Williams, M., & Levi, M. (2015). Perceptions of the e-crime controllers: Modelling the Influence of Cooperation and Data Source Factors. Security Journal, 28(3), 252–271.   
World Economic Forum’s Global Risks. (2014). https://www.un-spider.org/ news-and-events/news/world-economic-forum-publishes-global-risks-report2014. Accessed 5 June 2023.  